# Think carefully about copying behavior in resource-managing classes

There are cases where you need to create your own resource managing classes, say, you are using C API mutex, and creating an RAII class to wrap around it. For example,
```cpp
class Lock {
public:
  explicit Lock(Mutex *pm)
  : mutexPtr(pm)
  { lock(mutexPtr); }                          // acquire resource

  ~Lock() { unlock(mutexPtr); }                // release resource

private:
  Mutex *mutexPtr;
};

// to be used like this
Mutex m;                    // define the mutex you need to use

...

{                           // create block to define critical section
Lock ml(&m);               // lock the mutex

...                         // perform critical section operations

}                           // automatically unlock mutex at end
                            // of block
```

But what should happen if a lock object is copied?
```cpp
Lock ml1(&m);                      // lock m

Lock ml2(ml1);                     // copy ml1 to ml2—what should
                                   // happen here?
```
"What should happen when copied" is a question every RAII class author should confront. 
The usual answers are

* Prohibit copying, e.g. it rarely makes sense to copy a synchronization primitive like mutex

Refer to emcpp item 11. This is the behavior of std::unique\_ptr

* Reference count the underlying resource, e.g. a std::shared\_ptr

Often an RAII class can implement the reference counting behavior with a std::shared\_ptr data member.
If we want to allow the mutex to be reference counted, we could make the data member a std::shared\_ptr<Mutex> but with a custom deleter (since when the count drops to 0, we don't want to destroy the mutex but rather unlock it).
With TR1 it looks something like this:
```cpp
class Lock {
public:
  explicit Lock(Mutex *pm)       // init shared_ptr with the Mutex
  : mutexPtr(pm, unlock)         // to point to and the unlock func
  {                              // as the deleter

    lock(mutexPtr.get());   // see Item 15 for info on "get"
  }
private:
  std::tr1::shared_ptr<Mutex> mutexPtr;    // use shared_ptr
};                                         // instead of raw pointer
```
In this case, note the absence of a custom dtor.

* Copy the underlying resource

Sometimes you can have as many copies of the managed resource as you like, in which case the copy operations perform a deep copy of the managed resource.
Some implementations of std::string does this: string class contains pointer to heap memory, and both the pointer and the heap memory are copied when a string copy is made.

* Transfer ownership of the managed resource

Occasionally you may want to transfer ownership to the copied object when 'copying'.
This is the behavior of std::auto\_ptr.

**Takeaways**
* Copying an RAII object entails copying the resource it manages, so the copying behavior of the resource determines the copying behavior of the RAII object
* Common RAII class copying behaviors are disallowing copying and performing reference counting, but other behaviors (deep copy and transfer ownership) are possible


