# Use the same form in corresponding uses of new and delete

Consider this code
```cpp
std::string *stringArray = new std::string[100];
...
delete stringArray;
```
This is undefined behavior, at least, 99 of the 100 strings are unlikely to be properly destroyed, because their dtor will probably never be called.

When you employ a new operation, two things happen:
First, memory is allocated (via a function named operator new—see Items 49 and 51).
Second, one or more constructors are called for that memory.

When you employ a delete expression, two things happen:
First, one or more destructors are called for the memory.
Second, the memory is deallocated (via a function named operator delete—see Item 51).

The big question for delete is how many objects reside in the memory being deleted?
Whose answer decides how many dtors should be called.

Actually the question is simpler: does the pointer being deleted point to a single object or an array of objects?
This is important because layouts are usually different, think of it like this (compilers aren't required to implement it like this, but some do):
```
Single Object:    | Object |
Array of Objects: | n | Object | Object | ... |
```

When you call delete, the only way for it to know whether the layout looks like the first or the second is for you to tell it: whether you use delete[], or delete.
Like this:
```cpp
std::string *stringPtr1 = new std::string;

std::string *stringPtr2 = new std::string[100];
...

delete stringPtr1;                       // delete an object

delete [] stringPtr2;                    // delete an array of objects
```
Using delete[] on stringPtr1, or using delete on stringPtr2 would cause undefined behaviors (e.g., too many or too few dtors called as the memory layout is not interpretted correctly.)

This is particularly important to bear in mind when you write a class that deals with dynamic allocation and provides multiple versions of ctor: all of them must use the same new or new X[], as otherwise, dtor cannot be implemented.

Also for those using typedefs, they should document which form of delete should be used.
```cpp
typedef std::string AddressLines[4];   // a person's address has 4 lines,
                                       // each of which is a string

// because AddressLines is an array underlying, resource allocated with
std::string *pal = new AddressLines;   // note that "new AddressLines"
                                       // returns a string*, just like
                                       // "new string[4]" would
// should use
delete [] pal;                         // fine
```
To avoid such confusions, abstain from typedefs for array types, e.g. AddressLines could be a vector\<string\>

**Takeaways**
* If you use [] in a new expression, you must use [] in the corresponding delete expression. If you don't use [] in a new expression, you mustn't use [] in the corresponding delete expression.


