# Make interfaces easy to use correctly and hard to use incorrectly

Assuming your clients want to use your interface correctly, then if they manage to use it incorrectly, your interface would be partially to blame.

Ideally, if an attempted use of an interface won't do what the client expects, the code won't compile; and if the code does compile, it will do what the client wants.

Consider this interface
```cpp
class Date {
public:
  Date(int month, int day, int year);
  ...
};
```
What could go wrong? Clients may pass parameters in wrong order, or simply keyed in the wrong int (meh).

Many client errors can be avoided with the introduction of new types: the type system is your primary ally in preventing undesirable code from compiling.

In this case, say we have this
```cpp
struct Day {            struct Month {                struct Year {
  explicit Day(int d)     explicit Month(int m)         explicit Year(int y)
  :val(d) {}              :val(m) {}                    :val(y){}

  int val;                int val;                      int val;
};                      };                            };
class Date {
public:
Date(const Month& m, const Day& d, const Year& y);
...
};
Date d(30, 3, 1995);                      // error! wrong types

Date d(Day(30), Month(3), Year(1995));    // error! wrong types

Date d(Month(3), Day(30), Year(1995));    // okay, types are correct
```

Making Day, Month, and Year full-fledged classes with encapsulated data would be better than the simple use of structs above (see Item 22).

Once the right types are in place, it can sometimes be reasonable to restrict the values of those types.
For example, there are only 12 valid month values, so the Month type should reflect that.

One way to achieve that is to use enums, with C++11, enum classes due to type-safety.
Without using enums, you could do the following.

```cpp
class Month {
public:
  static Month Jan() { return Month(1); }   // functions returning all valid
  static Month Feb() { return Month(2); }   // Month values; see below for
  ...                                       // why these are functions, not
  static Month Dec() { return Month(12); }  // objects
  
  ...                                       // other member functions

private:
  explicit Month(int m);                    // prevent creation of new
                                            // Month values

  ...                                       // month-specific data
};
Date d(Month::Mar(), Day(30), Year(1995));
```
If the idea of using functions instead of objects to represent specific months strikes you as odd, it may be because you have forgotten that reliable initialization of non-local static objects can be problematic. Item 4 can refresh your memory.

And to remind you, unless there is good reason not to, have your types behave consistently with the built-in types. 
The real reason can be phrased as have interfaces behave consistently (with built-in types, amongst themselves.)
Think the STL: their container interfaces are largely (though not perfectly) consistent, and this helps make them fairly easy to use.
E.g. every STL container has a member function named size that tells how many objects are in the container.

Another way to prevent client errors is to restrict what can be done with a type, a common way is to add const qualifier.

Any interface that requires that clients remember to do something is prone to incorrect use, because clients can forget to do it.
For example this one,
```cpp
Investment* createInvestment();   // from Item 13; parameters omitted
                                  // for simplicity
```
Returning a raw pointer means the client needs to remember to delete that pointer exactly once, when they are done using it.
This would be error prone.
Instead, the interface could return a std::unique\_ptr or a std::shared\_ptr, which also has the benefit if you need a custom deleter behavior (instead of relying on client calling a deleteInvestment(), you could bind that in the smart pointer instantiation).
Like this (with custom deleter)
```cpp
std::tr1::shared_ptr<Investment> createInvestment()
{
  std::tr1::shared_ptr<Investment> retVal(nullptr,
                                          getRidOfInvestment);

  ...                                    // make retVal point to the
                                         // correct object

  return retVal;
}
```
The shared\_ptr version also works around the issue of cross-DLL deletion, where an object is created using new in one DLL and freed in another one. The shared pointer deletion in this case would guarantee that the same DLL news and deletes this object.

**Takeaways**
* Good interfaces are easy to use correctly and hard to use incorrectly. Your should strive for these characteristics in all your interfaces.
* Ways to facilitate correct use include consistency in interfaces and behavioral compatibility with built-in types.
* Ways to prevent errors include creating new types, restricting operations on types, constraining object values, and eliminating client resource management responsibilities.
* std::shared\_ptr supports custom deleters. This prevents the cross-DLL problem, can be used to automatically unlock mutexes (see Item 14), etc.


