# Treat class design like type design

Defining a new class meant designing a new type, meaning you're not just a class designer, you're a type designer augmenting C++'s type system.
You should therefore approach class design with the same care that language designers lavish on the design of the language's built-in types.
Good types have a natural syntax, intuitive semantics, and one or more efficient implementations.

How, then, do you design effective classes? First, you must understand the issues you face.
* **How should objects of your new type be created and destroyed**: this affects your ctor and dtor, and potentially operator new delete new[] delete[] overload
* **How should object initialization differ from object assignment**: this lets you decide how your ctors differ from assignment oprs
* **What does it mean for objects of your new type to be passed by value**: copy ctor defines how pass-by-value is implemented for a type
* **What are the restrictions on legal values for your new type**: usually only certain combinations of values for data members are valid (invariants that your class has to maintain). This determines the error checking you need to do, and your exception specification
* **Does your new type fit into an inheritance graph**: do you inherit from other classes, what functions of theirs are declared virtual, do you intend for other classes to inherit from yours, what functions should your class declare virtual
* **What kind of conversions are allowed for your type**: if you wish T1 to be implicitly convertible to T2, you will want either an operator T2 inside T1, or an non-explicit ctor in T2 that takes T1. If you want explicit conversions only, you'll write the conversions but avoid the two implicit approaches
* **What operators and functions make sense for the new type**
* **What standard functions should be disallowed**
* **Who should have access to the members of your new type**: public, protected, private members; friend functions; nest one class in another?
* **What is the "undeclared interface" of your new type**: what guarantees do your class offer in terms of performance, exception safety, and resource usage (think locks and dynamic memory)
* **How general is your new type**: are you defining one new type or a family of types? If it's the latter, you should probably define a class template
* **Is the new type really what you need**

**Takeaways**
* Class design is type design. Before defining a new type, be sure to consider all the issues discussed in this item.


