# Prefer pass-by-reference-to-const to pass-by-value

By default C++ passes by value, function parameters are initialized with copies of the actual argument.
These copies are produced by the objects' copy ctors.
This can make pass-by-value expensive.

Passing parameters by reference also avoids the slicing problem: when a derived class object is passed by value as a base class object, the part that only belongs to the derived part will be sliced off (since only a base class copy ctor is called).
Like passing by pointer, passing by reference does not have slicing problem.

If you peek under the hood of a C++ compiler, you'll find that references are typically implemented as pointers, so passing something by reference usually means really passing a pointer.
As a result, if you have an object of a built-in type (e.g., an int), it's often more efficient to pass it by value than by reference.
This same advice applies to iterators and function objects in the STL, because, by convention, they are designed to be passed by value. Implementers of iterators and function objects are responsible for seeing to it that they are efficient to copy and are not subject to the slicing problem.

Just because an object is small doesn't mean that calling its copy constructor is inexpensive: we pass built-in types by value not because they are small, but because of the underlying compiler impl (some compilers treat built-in types and (even small) user types differently: objects containing only a bare int will not be put into registers, while a bare int / pointer will).

Another reason why small user-defined types are not necessarily good pass-by-value candidates is that, being user-defined, their size is subject to change.
They can get bigger in the next release, or change as you switch to a different C++ impl (like some's impl of std::string can be 7 times as big as others)

**Takeaways**
* Prefer pass-by-reference-to-const over pass-by-value. It's typically more efficient and it avoids the slicing problem
* The rule doesn't apply to built-in types and STL iterator and function object types. For them, pass-by-value is usually appropriate


