# Declare data members private

Why not public data members?
* Syntactic consistency (item 18), clients will know always to retrieve data members with getter functions instead of scratching their head trying to remember.
* Member functions grant you more precise control. With member functions you can control read / write access, but with public members you can't.
* Most importantly, encapsulation. If you implement access to a data member with a function, you can later replace the data member with a computation, and no clients will be affected. Hiding data members behind functional interfaces can offer all kinds of implementation flexibility. E.g. it makes it easy to notify other objects when data members are read or written, to verify class invariants and function pre-and postconditions, to perform synchronization in threaded environments, etc.

If you hide your data members from your clients (i.e., encapsulate them), you can ensure that class invariants are always maintained, because only member functions can affect them. Furthermore, you reserve the right to change your implementation decisions later.
Public means unencapsulated, and practically speaking, unencapsulated means unchangeable, especially for classes that are widely used.

The argument against protected data members is similar.
Aren't protected data members more encapsulated than public ones? Practically speaking, the surprising answer is that they are not.
Something's encapsulation is inversely proportional to the amount of code that might be broken if that something changes.

Suppose we have a protected data member, and we eliminate it.
How much code might be broken now? All the derived classes that use it, which is typically an unknowably large amount of code, not unlike the case with public data members.

From an encapsulation point of view, there are really only two access levels: private (which offers encapsulation) and everything else (which doesn't).

**Takeaways**
* Declare data members private. It gives clients syntactically uniform access to data, affords fine-grained access control, allows invariants to be enforced, and offers class authors implementation flexibility
* protected is no more encapsulated than public


