# Prefer non-member non-friend functions to member functions

Often times you'll find yourself facing the choice of having a function being a member of a class, a function in this translation unit / namespace.
Say, you have a an object o with member functions a, b, c, and there is an action abc() that calls o.a(), o.b(), o.c(). Should abc() be a part of the class, or not (say, being a part of the namespace that the class is in)?

Object-oriented principles dictate that data and the functions that operate on them should be bundled together.
Object-oriented principles dictate that data should be as encapsulated as possible.

Start by inspecting encapsulation. Encapsulating something means it's hidden from view. The more something is encapsulated, the fewer see it, and the greater flexibility we have to change it.
This is why we value encapsulation: to be able to change something in a way that only affects a limited number of clients.
How encapsulated a data member in a class is can be evaluated by how many functions can access it. The less the number of functions accessing it, the more encapsulated it is.

Thus when given the choice of a member / friend function vs a non-member non-friend option, the preferred choice in terms of encapsulation is always the non-member non-friend function.

C++ doesn't require that all functions be a part of a class as Java, C\# does, so a natural approach in this case is to make the function (abc()) a part of the same namespace that the class is in.

Namespace, unlike classes, can spread across multiple files, and often times it only makes sense for some clients to know this abc(), and for those who don't care their compilation shouldn't require the declaration of abc() at all.
To address this, we could split these functions declarations into different headers.
This is how the std namespace is organized. memory, list, algorithm, vector, etc.
Clients only need to include part of the std library headers where the required symbol is declared, and in turn their compilation would only depend on those headers.

Partioning into different headers like described above is not possible for class member functions, as they have to appear in one file.

This approach of putting abc() in the namespace of the class also allows clients to easily extend the namespace with helper functions they need. This is another feature the member function approach cannot offer: classes are closed to extension by clients.

**Takeaways**
* Prefer non-member non-friend functions to member functions. Doing so increases encapsulation, packaging flexibility, and functional extensibilit


