# Understand the ins and outs of inlining

Inline replaces a function call with the body of the function code, which saves function call overhead, but results in larger object code size (in turn, additional page, reduced instruction cache hits, etc).

On the other hand, if an inline function is very short, the code generated for the function body may be smaller than that generated for a function call, and the effects of larger object size would be reversed.

Bear in mind `inline` is a request to the compiler, not a command.
Inline can be implicit or explicit:

```cpp
// implicit: defining a function inside a class definition
class Person {
public:
  ...
  int age() const { return theAge; }    // an implicit inline request: age is
  ...                                   // defined in a class definition
private:
  int theAge;
};

// explicit: (e.g. the definition of std::max)
template<typename T>                               // an explicit inline
inline const T& std::max(const T& a, const T& b)   // request: std::max is
{ return a < b ? b : a; }                          // preceded by "inline"
```

Inline functions must typically be in header files, because most compilers do inline during compilation, compilers need to know what the function looks like in order to inline.
(Some compilers can inline at linking or even at runtime (.Net), but inlining in C++ is mostly compile time)

Templates are typically in header files, because compiler needs to know what a template looks like in order to instantiate it.
(Some compilers can do instantiation at linking)

It's not true that function templates must be inline, they are independent.

Most compilers refuse to inline a function deemed too complicated (e.g. loops or recursion)

Virtual function calls cannot be inlined: if what to call is only known at runtime, then compiler cannot replace the function call with function body.

What's inlined would end up depending on the compiler, who usually emits a warning when it refuses to inline something you told it to.

If your program takes the address of a function, compiler will need to generate a function body anyway.
Compilers generally don't perform inlining over calls made through function pointers.
Thus if something ends up being inlined or not sometimes depends on how it's called. Like
```cpp
inline void f() {...}      // assume compilers are willing to inline calls to f

void (*pf)() = f;          // pf points to f

...

f();                      // this call will be inlined, because it's a "normal" call

pf();                     // this call probably won't be, because it's through
                          // a function pointer
```

Even if you don't use function pointers, compilers may do.
In fact, ctors and dtors are often worse candidates for inlining than a casual examination would indicate.
For example,
```cpp
class Base {
public:
...

private:
   std::string bm1, bm2;               // base members 1 and 2
};

class Derived: public Base {
public:
  Derived() {}                         // Derived's ctor is empty — or is it?
  ...

private:
  std::string dm1, dm2, dm3;           // derived members 1–3
};
```
`Derived`'s ctor may contain no user code, but in order to make Base class construction happen, `string` members construction happen, and rollback if a part of it is done then exception happens, compiler has to generate code.
E.g. like the following
```cpp
Derived::Derived()                       // conceptual implementation of
{                                        // "empty" Derived ctor

Base::Base();                           // initialize Base part

try { dm1.std::string::string(); }      // try to construct dm1
catch (...) {                           // if it throws,
   Base::~Base();                        // destroy base class part and
   throw;                                // propagate the exception
}

try { dm2.std::string::string(); }      // try to construct dm2
catch(...) {                            // if it throws,
   dm1.std::string::~string();           // destroy dm1,
   Base::~Base();                        // destroy base class part, and
   throw;                                // propagate the exception
}

try { dm3.std::string::string(); }      // construct dm3
catch(...) {                            // if it throws,
   dm2.std::string::~string();           // destroy dm2,
   dm1.std::string::~string();           // destroy dm1,
   Base::~Base();                        // destroy base class part, and
   throw;                                // propagate the exception
}
}
```
Considering all the code added by the compiler, inlining a ctor or dtor might lead to excessive bloat in object code.

Library compiler must also consider that inlining a function makes it get compiled with client's code.
Should the library decide to change that function, clients would now need to recompile as opposed to relink, which is often times undesirable.
And if the library is dynamically, this change may be absorbed in a way transprent to clients.

Most debuggers have trouble with inline functions (how do you set a breakpoint to a function that's not there?).
Some debuggers do support it, while others may simply disable inlining for debug builds.

To summarize the strategy with regard to inlining, initially don't inline anything (or limit to those that have to be inline or trivial).
Then figure out the right functions to inline. (Remember the 80-20 rule of 80% of time might be spent executing 20% of the code, thus finding out the right functions to inline is important)

**Takeaways**
* Limit most inlining to small, frequently called functions. This facilitates debugging and binary upgradability, minimizes potential code bloat, and maximizes the chances of greater program speed
* Don't declare function templates inline just because they appear in header files


