# Understand when it makes sense to replace `new` and `delete`

Why would anybody want to replace the default `new` and `delete`?
* **To detect usage errors**: if `new` and `delete` keeps track of allocated addresses, it'd be easier to tell double free. To detect overruns (writing beyond the end of a block) and underruns (writing before the start of a block), which you can do via `new` over-allocating a block to start with to accommodate certain byte patterns, and `delete` checks if those patterns are violated)
* **To improve efficiency**: the default needs to accommodate all patterns, large small frequent infrequent, and they need to worry about heap fragmentation. They work reasonably well for everybody, but really well for nobody. If you understand the memory usage pattern of your program, a custom `new` and `delete` can be much faster and use less memory
* **To collect usage statistics**: to understand the memory usage pattern of your program. How big are the sizes, how long are their lifetimes? FIFO, LIFO, or mostly random? How the pattern changes over time? High watermark?

Here is a `new` that has byte patterns to check for underrun / overrun.
```cpp
static const int signature = 0xDEADBEEF;

typedef unsigned char Byte;

// this code has several flaws—see below
void* operator new(std::size_t size) throw(std::bad_alloc) {
  using namespace std;

  size_t realSize = size + 2 * sizeof(int);    // increase size of request so2
                                               // signatures will also fit inside

  void *pMem = malloc(realSize);               // call malloc to get theactual
  if (!pMem) throw bad_alloc();                // memory

  // write signature into first and last parts of the memory
  *(static_cast<int*>(pMem)) = signature;
  *(reinterpret_cast<int*>(static_cast<Byte*>(pMem)+realSize-sizeof(int))) =
  signature;

  // return a pointer to the memory just past the first signature
  return static_cast<Byte*>(pMem) + sizeof(int);
}
```
One issue is that this `operator new` does not conform with the convention: e.g. it doesn't call `new_hanlde` in a loop in case of `bad_alloc`.
Item 51 discusses that in more details.
Here look at a more subtle issue, **alignment**: many architectures require data of particular types be placed at particular kinds of addresses. (E.g. an architecture might require that pointers occur at addresses that are a multiple of four (four-byte-aligned), or doubles appear at a multiple of eight (eight-byte-aligned)).
Failure to follow such conventions may lead to hardware exceptions at runtime, or slower execution.

C++ requires that all `operator new`s return pointers that are suitably aligned for any data type.
`malloc` labors under the same requirement, so returning a pointer allocated by `malloc` is safe, however in our sample we are returning the result of `malloc` offset by an `int`.
On a machine where `int` is 4 bytes, and `double` needs to be 8-bytes aligned, we'd probably return a pointer with improper alignment.
(`tr1` adds support for discovering type-specific alignment requirements)

Writing a custom memory manager that almost works is pretty easy. Writing one that works well is a lot harder. As a general rule, I suggest you not attempt it unless you have to.

In many cases, you don't, compilers / tools may have a flag to facilitate debugging and logging functionality in their memory management functions.

Or you can use open source memory managers, `Pool` from boost, e.g.
`Pool` deals with a large number of small objects well.

To summarize when you might want to customize `new` and `delete` in more details:
* To detect usage errors
* To collect statistics about the use of dynamically allocated memory
* To increase the speed of allocation and deallocation (profile before you do such!)
* To reduce the space overhead of default memory management
* To compensate for suboptimal alignment in the default allocator
* To cluster objects near one another: to reduce page faults (`placement new` in item 52)
* To obtain unconventional behaviors: e.g. you want to work with shared memory but only have a C API to do it, you could provide a C++ wrapper via custom `new` `delete` that call into the C API

**Takeaways**
* There are many valid reasons for writing custom versions of new and delete, including improving performance, debugging heap usage errors, and collecting heap usage information


Snippet:
```cpp
// replace_new.m.cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <memory>
#include <new>

// demonstrates a custom albeit unideal `operator new`

static const int signature = 0xDEADBEEF;

typedef unsigned char Byte;

// this code has several flaws: not conforming to convention (e.g. call handler
// in a loop), and alignment may be broken (returning a pointer from malloc is
// safe, but offset this by an int may break alignment assumption for doubles)
void* operator new(std::size_t size) throw(std::bad_alloc) {
  using namespace std;
  cout << "using custom new\n";

  size_t realSize = size + 2 * sizeof(int);    // increase size of request so2
                                               // signatures will also fit inside

  void *pMem = malloc(realSize);               // call malloc to get theactual
  if (!pMem) throw bad_alloc();                // memory

  // write signature into first and last parts of the memory
  *(static_cast<int*>(pMem)) = signature;
  *(reinterpret_cast<int*>(static_cast<Byte*>(pMem) + realSize - sizeof(int))) =
    signature;

  // return a pointer to the memory just past the first signature
  return static_cast<Byte*>(pMem) + sizeof(int);
}

int main() {
  double *pData = new double;
  *pData = 10.0;
  std::cout << *pData << "\n";
  return 0;
}


```
